

Fitgal - A galaxy bulge disk decomposition code

Yogesh Wadadekar and Ajit Kembhavi

Version 1.4 May 2003



Abstract

Fitgal is a open source C and FORTRAN code for two dimensional bulge
disk decomposition developed at IUCAA in Pune, India. It capabilities
have been described in Wadadekar, Robbason and Kembhavi (1999).

1 What is Fitgal

Two dimensional galaxy image decomposition has been gaining popularity
in recent years. (Byun and Freeman 1995; Bagget, Bagget and Anderson
1998; Wadadekar, Robbason and Kembhavi (1999); D'Onofrio 1999). Fitgal
is a robust, documented open source code. It uses the PGPLOT library
for graphical representation of the fitting process. 

1.1 Who uses fitgal ?

Fitgal has been used at the following locations:

1. Extra-galactic Astrophysics Group, TIFR

2. Extra-galactic Astrophysics Group, IUCAA

2 Installing the software

2.1 Software and Hardware requirements:

Fitgal has been designed to be portable across Unix and Unix-like systems.
It has been compiled and used on SunOS, Solaris, Digital UNIX, IRIX
and Linux. It uses the CPGPLOT (C binding for PGPLOT) library for
graphical output to monitor the fitting process. If you do not have
PGPLOT installed on your system already, you need to download and
install it from http://www.astro.caltech.edu/~tjp/pgplot/

Fitgal places no specific requirements on the hardware. However a Sun
Ultra class worstation is required if you want to process significant
number of galaxies in a reasonable amount of time.

2.2 Obtaining fitgal

Fitgal 1.4 source in tar.gz format may be downloaded from the following
URL You can find here the latest version of the software along with
some documentation.

2.3 Installation

To install you must first uncompress and untar the archive:

gzip -dc fitgal1.4.tar.gz | tar xv

A new directory called fitgal 1.4 should now appear in your current
working directory. Then cd to that directory and follow the installation
instructions in the file called INSTALL.

3 Using the software

3.1 Running fitgal

Fitgal is started from the command prompt by simply typing fitgal.
This starts the minimisation process. Periodic visual reports are
provided about the progress of the fit. All parameters related to
the fitting are set in configuration files described below.

3.2 Configuration files

Several configuration files are required by fitgal. These are:

1. fitgal_min.d contains configuration parameters for the minimization
  by MINUIT. Please check the documentation for details on the syntax
  of this file.

2. fitgal.conf: Here you need to specify where the galaxy data is sitting,
  a bad pixel file (can be empty), sigma (FWHM/2.35) for a Gaussian
  PSF in pixels, the X and Y coordinates of the center of the galaxy
  and the position angle (starting value).

4 Interpreting the outputs

The main output files are:

1. fitgal.results: minimized bulge and disk parameters

2. fitgal.convresults: the same values as above but formatted for better
  human readibility.

3. pgplot.gif and pgplot.ps contain visual representations of the final
  fit.

4. fitgal.output: The best fit model image in ASCII format

5. fitgal.ans: File created by MINUIT giving details of the progress
  of the fit, exit conditions etc. and errors on the parameters

5 FAQ
